---
title: "Guelph Center for Urban Organic Farming"
date: 2019-02-22T11:39:36-08:00
draft: false
---


This is an ode to the [Guelph Center for Urban Organic
Farming](https://gcuof.wordpress.com/), an organic farm
located on the University of Guelph campus, where I fell in love with gardening
and discovered that permaculture can feed the world.

---

The Guelph Center for Urban Organic Farming is a sanctuary. A botanical
paradise. A fantasy realm in our own backyard. It is a stunning beacon of
productivity; a shining ray of sustainable capacity; a testament to the
permacultural principles.

Some students find comfort and stress relief in playing with puppies. But time
and again I found it on the urban organic farm. The crisp air, the colors, the
vegetable tapestry; how quaint the seeds, how cute the seedlings, how bountiful
the plants!

How honest and right it feels to have your hands in the soil, your mind on the
seasons, your heart with the bees. To have your taste buds tuned to the very
fruits of your own labour.

Like the university’s financial coffers, its research labs, and its libraries,
the urban organic farm compounds value. It is a powerhouse of learning and
growth. Stewarded by patient farm hands, it transforms the rampant chaos of
reality into the most fertile soil in the land; the healthiest and most
sustainable food in your existence.

We want to ensure the GCUOF has the resources it needs to survive and thrive.
Investment in the GCUOF is an investment in the sustainability of the campus and
the well-being of all who stroll across it.
