---
title: "Short History of European Coins - 500 to 1500"
date: 2023-08-27
draft: false
description: "A short history of metals and coinage in Europe, based on
Spufford's Money and its use in Medeival Europe."
---

The money and coinage of medieval Europe evolved from the fallout of money in Rome. Names and types of money proliferated, but at least in western Europe there emerged a general structure and story, captured by the eternal legacy of the pounds, shilling, and pence. This is a brief account of that story.

The original terms are the libra, solidus, and denarius, which date back to Rome. The libra was a unit of weight, the Roman "pound". The solidus and denarius were gold and silver coins respectively. But the silver denarius was minted from the Punic Wars (200 BC) until about 200 AD, while the gold solidus only began to be minted in the early 300s AD. By then, the denarius had been debased to copper. It seems the gold solidus and silver denarius may never have overlapped. Of course there is much more background to Roman coins, essentially the story of ancient coinage and money. But that's a story for another time.

The coinage of late Rome had no silver - just gold and copper. Copper is less important to the larger story as copper coins did not become the basis of our units of account in Europe - the gold and silver coins did. At a point in late Rome, a gold solidus was worth some 7200 copper coins. A Roman senator could make 100k-350k solidus per year, and could buy a slave for ~20 solidi. Copper coins could be used for small day-to-day purchases in the towns.

## The Metals

An essential force behind the evolution of coinage within a state is the availability of metal, which comes either from having access to a mine, or else to a trade surplus with another region. The state could also exact payments in metal from other regions by force or political decree, though this generally produces less metal than mines and trade, and is generally more unstable. Europe until the modern era has generally been at a trade deficit with the rest of the world. There are periods where Europe exports so many slaves that they generate a surplus (and name a people, the Slavs), but this is an exception. 

Of course there are also two metals - gold and silver - and relative value between them, which differ between places and times. Europe has long fixated on a ratio of 1:12, with gold worth 12 times as much as silver. But Europe also has millennia long history of mining silver, with little gold. Much of the gold has come from Africa, where the ratio with silver has been much lower, say, 1:6. The Italians made a habit of accumulating silver from Europe and trading it for African gold. The history of European money has largely hinged on the availability to Europe of silver mines, the political capital to exploit them, and the capacity to convert silver to gold. That is, until the emergence of gold mining in Europe in the 14th c.

The history of mining gives some structure to the monetary and political history of Europe. It alternates between periods with access to mines, and periods without. Successful mines might be reasonably exploited for some ~100 years. The times with access are boom times. Those without are busts, where bullion famine can become severe. Both boom and bust can leave lasting impressions on institutional structure. 

There are 4 major periods of mine exploitation in Europe between Late Rome and the 16th c. The first three involve silver, and mark eras of important reforms or "revolutions". The last involves gold, marking its return. Europe had been without gold for virtually a millennium. The periods are as follows:
    - ~600s-800s - Silver mines in Melle in western France - Charlemagne's Reforms, the silver denier, a false dawn of coinage. Rise of feudalism from lack of gold
    - 960s-1030s - Silver mines in Goslar in the Harz mountains in Saxony - Urbanization Revolution, mints and markets come back all across northern europe and England
    - 1160s - 1330s - Silver mines in Germany and Bohemia (Czech) - "Commercial Revolution" in Italy and Middle East, Fairs of Champagne, International English Silver Sterling and Italian Gold Florins
    - 1320s - 1400s - Gold mines in Hungary - Hungarian Florins, English Nobles, French Ecus, and the return of gold to Europe at large

Once we know what metal is available when, its easier to follow the history of the coins.

## Fallout From Rome

Before the Melle mines come into play in the 7th c, we are left in the 5th c, with the collapse of Roman political authority, no mines, and a decaying coinage. In England, minting appears to have stopped for some 200 years. The German kingdoms that succeeded Rome - primarily the Merovingian Franks in "France/Germany" and the Visigoths in "Spain" - tried to maintain the coinage best they could as minting became increasingly fragmented and variable across Europe. The silver was non existent, the copper had mostly disappeared, and the gold was draining out. 

The old Roman solidus continued to be minted, along with a coin 1/3 its size and value, the trimissis, or triens. As the coinage debased and gold continued to drain, the solidus itself disappeared in favour of the triens. But the word "solidus" continued to be used to denominate debt. Except now a solidus did not mean one solidus coin, since such coins didn't exist anymore. Instead, it meant three triens coins. The solidus had thus become a unit of account, the triens its medium of exchange.

By the 7th/8th c, there was such a dearth of gold that Merovingian kings and lords did not have sufficient gold to pay warriors. So they started paying them in grants of land, and hence initiated the rise of feudalism as a form of social organization. The use of coinage continued to decay.

## Melle, the Franks, and a False Dawn

In the early 7th c, silver is found in Melle (western "France") and a mine opens. The Merovingian Franks bring back silver coinage in the form of a new denier. The triens was still being minted, a gold coin a bit bigger than an American dime, but now debased to only 1/3  gold. The new denier was modeled after the triens, but made of silver. Thus, if gold was twelve times as valuable as silver, the triens would be 12/3 times as valuable - so 4 of the new silver deniers were worth a triens. Since a solidus is defined as 3 triens, 12 deniers were worth a solidus. And 240 of these deniers could be cut from a pound weight of silver. Hence the familiar ratio, 1 libra = 20 solidi = 240 deniers had emerged. That the triens was defined as 1/3 a solidus, and that it also only contained 1/3 gold by the time the denier was minted, may have been lucky coincidence, preserving 1:12. Perhaps not. Who knows. 

So here we have the relationship that will define moneys of account throughout Europe for centuries. That 1 pound, libra, lira, livre was worth 20 solidus, soldo, sou, shilling, each of which was worth 12 deniers, pennies, pfennigs, pence. (34) 

When it was first minted, or at least for some time, 240 denier coins were minted from each pound of weight. This relationship presumably lasted long enough that the libra would come to __mean__ 240 deniers, even as the number of deniers cut per pound weight increased. In other words, the pound had itself become a unit of account, distinct from the pound weight. A pound weight brought to the mint bought you __more__ than 240 deniers - more than a pound unit of account.

Minting by now had become a fragmented institution, with hundreds of local mints and minimal standardization. Many of them were minting deniers inscribed with just their location, and no royal authority. Over the years, the deniers diverged and debased, especially as funds were raised to pay for war with the Ummayads coming up from "Spain." The number of coins struck from a pound weight increased from 240 up to 300. The libra of account, which always meant 240 deniers, had decoupled from the libra of weight.

When the Carolingians took power under Pepin the Short, the coinage was strengthened back to 264 deniers cut from a pound weight. The libra as unit of account continued to mean 240 deniers, but its value in metal increased or decreased with the mint policy. When Pepin's son Charlemagne took over, he saw to it that the coinage was standardized under royal authority across the empire, and he strengthened it further. Thus did he set a new standard for the quality of silver coinage in Europe - the __denier carolingienne__, weighing about 1.7g of silver, XXX fine. 

This return to silver coinage brought with it a flourishing of a peasant agricultural economy and a return of markets for peasants to meet and exchange goods for coin. It also engendered occasional inter-regional markets, like the Fairs of St Denis, just North of Paris, which seem to arise in the 7th c, and prosper through the 9th. The silver deniers are the money of the markets, the money of the fairs. But it was a new money, unlike that of Byzantium or the old Rome. As Spufford puts it:

    - When gold coinage had finally disappeared outside Italy, western Europe was left
with a new system of coinage, based on the silver penny, which was entirely unlike
either that which survived in the east, in the Byzantine Empire, or that which had
existed in the later Roman Empire. It was not that the barbarians had brought
something new, and differently Germanic, into the Roman world, for they had had
no coinage of their own, but that a transformation had taken place after the
barbarian peoples were inside the Roman world. The break with antiquity was not
a revolutionary break at a single instant, as when the Germanic peoples crossed the
Rhine frontier in 406, but an evolutionary break, which had taken more than two
centuries to work out. The disappearance of the coinage systems of antiquity, like
the disappearance of the Roman senatorial aristocracy, took many generations. It
was none the less complete.

Ultimately, however, the Melle mines and the Carolingian standard were a false dawn for coinage in Europe as the mines ran down, the Carolignian dynasty fractured, and the new currency devalued over the 9th c. This short resurgence of silver coinage in Europe was dealt its fatal blow by the Vikings, who basically came to take it all.

With the collapse of Carolinginan political authority, the counts took over their local mints and minting fragmented again. There is an overall decline in the use of money. The Vikings, which are extracting payments from kingdoms across Europe, take their silver by weight, and treat the coins as merely weights of silver. 

## Saxon Silver

The real start to coinage in Europe then did not come from the Franks or Charlemagne, though they provided the renewed libra/solidus/denier standard. The real start came from Saxony, in the north, when in the 960s silver was found in the copper and lead mines in the Harz mountains near the town of Goslar. The silver that flowed out of these mines led to an explosion of commercial centers across Germany and England as mints and markets popped up together across northern Europe. 

The silver caused a surge in minting in England, which by the late 10th c had become fully monetized. The English maintained such tight control over their coinage that they began a program of coinage renewal, the __renovatio monetae__. Every some years, the entire coinage was recalled and reminted. The king collected a tax from the reminting, and the old coinage was demonetized. This practice would be later mimicked in eastern Europe. 

By the early 11th c in England and Germany, everyone is using coins. There is an urban renaissance. Some rents and taxes in England and Italy are collected in coin. Europe monetizes. Coin comes to be seen in the north increasingly as currency, not just weight. Kingdoms of Bohemia, Hungary, Poland, Kiev, Norway accept Christianity and start minting coins (according to the standards of their Christian advisers). But by the 1030s, the silver from Goslar is on the decline, and by the later half of the century, the general reduction in coinage brings about a recession across northern Europe.
    - are there inter regional fairs using this silver? is St Denis still active?  

At the end of the 11 th c, Europe experiences a new wave of activity engendered by the crusades. Raising the funds for the crusades was a heroic feat, perhaps aided by the new silver that had accumulated. But Europe's chronic trade deficit, and the massive expenses of the crusades, caused this metal to drain out to Italy and the East.

The silver of Saxony did not seem to make much way into France. And by the late 11th c, minting fragmented again across the continent. England and Italy manage to maintain strong centralized control over their mints. But across France and Germany, it becomes necessary to qualify units of account by location. Charlemagne's common monetary standard was long lost. The 'period of regional pfennigs' had begun. (104)

## The Silver of the Commercial Revolution

In the 11th and 12th centuries, the coinage continued to diverge. In the early 12th century, Europe was experiencing bullion famine, amplified greatly by the crusades. But major new sources of silver were about to be discovered in a series of mines centered around Prague. It began in the 1160s, where a new town was setup on the eastern end of the Holy Roman Empire to exploit newly found silver. This was Freiberg, or "free mountain," alluding to the freedoms granted to the miners. Freiberg was followed by mines just south-east of Prague, at Jihlava, and then Kutna Hora. Around the same time that this silver was being found around Bohemia, silver was also being found in Italy, first in Tuscany, and later and more significantly in Sardinia. Silver was mined more or less continuously in one region or another from the late 12th c to the early 14th. 

The new silver led to a heyday in feudal coinage. There was so much silver, every minor baron could run a mint. Amidst the chaos, certain silver pennies became particularly famous. In 1180 England, King Henry II established the fine sterling standard with the new short-cross penny. At 92.5% fine silver, it was less susceptible to wear than finer silver coins, and yet strong enough to become a widespread standard. Italians would come to accumulate this sterling at the Champagne fairs, which peaked in the late 12th/13 century, and presumably benefited substantially from the new silver boom. The common unit of account of the fairs, the __livre provinois__, was defined as 240 of the silver __denier provinois__ minted in Champagne. In Paris they were minting the __denier parisis__, and to the southwest at the Abbey of St Martin at Tours was minted a coin that would soon become standard across France, the __denier tournois__. Of course both Paris and Tours had their own __livre__ of account, each worth 240 of their respective pennies.

13th century France, perhaps emboldened by the silver flooding in, embarked on a determined project of state building and centralization. King Philip II of France, in the early 13th c TODO ..., impressed with the quality of the denier tournois from Tours, began to enforce it as a common standard, and the livre tournois as the common unit of account for the land. It took time to catch on. The denier tournois was worth about 4/5 of the denier parisis, which continued to be minted in Paris for centuries, though remained fixed in value with the tournois, until it was finally phased out. The denier provinois continued to be used in Champagne. But by the end of the 13th c, the French kings were intervening in Champagne, and the fairs went into decline. 
    - how long did the provinois continue to be used in champagne?

- Marks. Silver of weight.
    - Ingots of Silver
        - pound became uoa when money was homogenous. mark becomes uoa in heterogenous
        - mark of Troyes (champagne) used to weight silver in france/low countries for long time. number of deniers to mark never constant enough for it to become uoa


Meanwhile, the Italians. If the new silver strengthened the kings of France, it all the more so  strengthened the Italian merchants and their city states, especially when imposed on the new networks of colonization and trade they had built through the Crusades in Northern Africa, Byzantium, and the Near East. Silver was crucial fuel for the Crusades. The first 2 crusades, which came before the new silver, caused metal to drain out of Europe to Italy and to the East. But armed with new sources of silver, the crusades resumed with fury in the late 12th c and carried on all through the 13th. The Third Crusade would see two of our silver protagonists,  Henry II of England and Philip II of France, put aside their differences to team up. And the Fourth Crusade would see the rise of a new silver coinage in Venice that would soon spread across Europe.

The crusaders were supposed to pay the Ventians some 85k marks of silver (a unit of weight) for transport in the Fourth Crusade. But the Venetians needed this silver to be distributed to a large number of people, and doing it with their small denari would have required minting way too many coins. By now their denari contained only 0.1g of silver, compared to the English's 1.3g penny, or Charlemagnes 1.7g standard. So they made a new "great" coin, the __grossi__, worth 24 of the old denari, and weighing just under 2.2g. The old denari went on being minted, but came to be known as __piccoli__ for "little ones". Thus a new tier had been added to the monetary system, a large silver coin minted alongside a small one. The grossi and denari. The Venetian Grossi also came to be called "ducat", from the word "dux" on the back. 

In Italy, coinage was divided by city state, and each city had a unit of account and coinage that evolved in its own way. By the late 13th c, Genoa is minting its own grossi. By the early 13th c, every important Italian city north of Rome is minting ~2g grossi. The grossi spread across Europe, used for wages and rents, while deniers went on being used for small purchases and alms. In Tuscany, its grossi circulated at 12 denari, or 1 soldi. Meaning the Tuscan soldi, which had until now been just a unit of account, finally materialized as a large silver coin. The same thing happened in France, in 1266, with the new silver __gros tournois__, worth 1 __sous tournois__. The __sous tournois__, which had only ever been a unit of account, materialized as its own coin. But these grossi would not be worth a soldi or a sous for long, as the sous of account was defined as 12 deniers, and the denier continued to debase. Thus the unit of account would devalue, and the value of the grossi in the unit would be "cried up" as a gros became worth more than 12 deniers.

In certain places, a unit of account would form independently around the grossi, using it as the new basis - effectively replacing the penny as the basis for the unit of account. This was the case in Low Countries, where the __grosch__ become a dominant coin, and units of account came to be reckoned in pounds, shelling, and pfennigs of grosch - 240 grosh coins made up the new grosh pound. 
    - TODO fix this paragraph

The Venetians, which invented the grossi in the Fourth Crusade, were also that Crusades major beneficiary. The 4th crusade culminated in the the Sack of Constantinople, which greatly weakened Byzantium and strengthened Venetian control over the Mediterranean. The new silver in general helped the Italians stabilize control over the Mediterranean network, and served as essential fuel for harnessing that network throughout the 13th c. For the Italians were everywhere looking to turn silver to gold. 

By the mid 13th c, the balance of trade for the Italians was such that large amounts of gold were flowing into the northern city states, sufficient for them to start minting gold currency in Europe for the first time in some 500 years. To be fair, gold coinage had existed in southern Italy, which was part of Byzantium, for much of this period. Alas, we will not much cover the Byzantine or Arab coinage here during this time, despite the major impact its had on the medeival European coinage we have been discussing (eg. the design of the Merovingian deniers was taken from the Ummayad coinage). 

Within a few months in 1252, both Florence and Genoa had started minting a gold coin. They would later come to be joined by Venice with its ducat in 128X. For Florence, its florin was initially worth 1 Florentine lira. Thus the florentine lira had finally materialized as its own coin. For Genoa, its lira had not devalued as much as that of florence, and it's new gold genovino coin was worth 8 Genoese soldi. These coins are remarkable for the role they came to play in international trade.

The massive injection of silver led to a resurgence in trade across Europe that came to be known as the Commercial Revolution, named after the transformation that occurred in means of commerce, epitomized by the rise of the Italians and the ways they conducted business. The central pivot of the European commercial revolution were the Fairs of Champagne, which the Italians had been frequenting already in the 12th c, but which rose to new importance as a roundevouz across all European trade. It was here that new credit instruments, like the Bills of Exchange, appear to have arisen, facilitating the conduct of commerce from afar. Hindu-Arabic numerals and bookkeeping appear to arrive in Italy at this time, with Fibonnaci's great book of 1202. 
    - Deposit banking

The Commercial Revolution saw a separation of roles for merchants, and the emergence of a new stationary class - merchants who could conduct their business from afar, without travel. Italian businessmen conducted their business from home, making ample use of carriers to travel between places with goods and letters, and of trusted (often family) factors, agents, and correspondents spread across the cities of Europe to execute transactions on their behalf. Italian pre-eminence in business and monetary matters led them to run mints and mines. The growth of their economies allowed them to do import replacement, producing locally things they previously needed to import. And finally, it opened the gateway for the return to gold in Europe.
    - bills and deposits more important than gold coins and grossi (262)

## Victory of Gold

Just as the mining of silver in Europe (now primarily at Kutna Hora, Bohemia)is about to start running down, in 1320, new gold mines are opened in Hungary (in Kremnica, now in Slovakia) that unleash a torrent of gold into Europe. By 1328, Hungary is minting the first successful gold coin beyond the Alps, a copy of the florin. So much of this gold was traded for Bohemian silver that the Bohemians soon followed suit with their own gold coin. In the same year, mint reforms in Venice move the city from a silver standard to one based on gold.  Like in the Low Countries, in Italy new units of account emerged based on the new coins, the grossi and the gold coins.  By 1355, silver grossi are no longer being minted in Venice, and accounts are now reckoned in lire, soldi and denari __di grossi a oro__ - the grosso was no longer a real coin, but had dematerialized into a unit of account worth 1/24 of the real gold ducat. A similar thing happened in Florence, as their unit of account came to be gold based lire, soldi, and denari __affiorino__. 

This re-emergence of gold puts Europe squarely on a bimetallic monetary system, and the relative mint prices of gold and silver in diffferent countries lead to bullion flows across borders as merchants seek to take advantage of arbitrage opportunities across mints. France tries to start minting their own gold coins - the various flavours of __ecu d'or__ - as early as the late 13th c to compete with the Italians, but they don't take off until the 14th. Ecu (in Italian, __scudo__) means "shield", and the different ecus that emerge over the years are named according to the image on their obverse. 

The 1330s see the start of the Hundred Years War, of which the new gold played a key part. Both Edward III of England and Philip VI of France begin minting their respective gold coins, the English noble and the French ecu a la chaise. Philip's ecu a la chaise are originally worth 1 livre tournois (though they would be cried up over the years as the unit of account devalued), and are used to subsidize his allies in the Netherlands. Edward also raised significant sums of gold florins from his Florentine bankers (who he would famously default on), used to pay for his own allies in the Netherlands. Thus did significant amounts of gold start to collect in the Low Countries. 

In 1360 John II starts minting his __ecu a cheval__, which also comes to be known as the __franc__. It's initially valued again at 1 livre tournois, and the word __franc__ comes to be a synonym for the __livre tournois__, the dominant French unit of account. These ecus would again come to be cried up as the unit of account devalued over time. In the late 15th century Louis XI starts minting the __ecu au soleil__, a variant of __ecu a la couronne__, both of which are named for the appearance of a sun. 

In the 16th century the ecu au soleil would settle for a time at a value of 45 sous tournois (up 2.25x from when an ecu was worth 1 livre, or 20 sous), inspiring the development of a new unit of account, the __ecu de marc__, equal to 45 sous tournois.  The ecu de marc would be the basis for a network dominated by Italian exchange bankers who dealt in bills of exchange, allowing for exchange between units of account across Europe. At so it was that a crisis of this network in the late 16th century would ultimately lead to the end of the medeival monetary system and to the rise of a new monetary constitution - that of modernity.
