--- 
title: "Defund the Dealers"
date: 2023-02-05
draft: false 
description: "Inspired by Walter Benjamin's Critique of Violence and Colin
Drumm's the Difference that Money Makes, this post argues that dealers are to
the Market what cops are to the Law, and that we ought to defund both."
---

# Defund the Dealers

Walter Benjamin argues in his Critique of Violence that violence both confirms
and threatens the Law. This is reminiscent of Colin Drumm's argument that
transactions both confirm and threaten the Market, and that succession both
confirms and threatens the Sovereign. Is there a common logic here?

Consider these domains, the Law and the Market. Each abstracts away from local
reality and experience by conjuring aggregate entities that are increasingly
experienced only indirectly. These abstract aggregates are an incomplete
conceptualization of life, and yet in the formation of States we forgo more
complete, kinship-based, "embedded" logics for these abstractions, leaving gaps
in the social fabric. These gaps come to be filled by specialized groups that
manifest the anxiety of the incompleteness of the abstractions. For Law, this
group is the police. For the Market, it is the dealers. Each case is
characterized by an emergency, a state-of-exception, which determines their
power.

The problem of the incompleteness of Law and the state-of-exception is taken up
by Carl Schmitt. For Schmitt, the state-of-exception emerges at the top-level,
final decision maker of the legal system - generally the Supreme Court, beyond
which a case cannot be appealed further. But Benjamin argues that the
state-of-exception is in a sense not exceptional at all, but is rather a
constant presence in the reality of a society riddled with the gaps created by
the abstractions of Law. The presence is made most manifest in the form of the
police.

## Critique of Violence

Benjamin offers this argument through a critique of positive law. Unlike natural
law, where “the ends justify the means,” for positive law, the "means justify
the ends,” and hence we have to evaluate violence on the basis of its use as a
means. For violence to be justified in positive law, it must be accompanied by a
proof of its historical origin and thus its legitimacy, its provenance. This is
what makes it legal violence - it’s the violence of the victors. 

Benjamin considers violence as a means for two different kinds of ends -
"natural ends" that don't acknowledge existing legal violence, and "legal ends"
that do. Benjamin calls the first kind "law-making" violence and the second kind
"law-preserving" violence. Law-making violence behaves as if the new law always
should have been in place - it has a mythic quality, realizable only by victors.
In mythological narratives about the origins of such laws, humans are seen as
having tempted fate by not abiding them. Law-preserving violence, on the other
hand, is administrative - it ensures violence is only used for laws that were
already made. 

Benjamin highlights an essential tension here - law-preserving
violence undermines the efforts of positive law to have the means justify the
ends by requiring violence to enforce legal ends! This conundrum can only be
resolved by the intervention of revolutionary energy, which Benjamin calls
"sovereign" violence. There’s a lot to unpack in all this, but we’re going to
focus in on what Benjamin has to say about the police - it is in the institution
of the police that the distinction between law-making violence and
law-preserving violence is dissolved.

## Security in the Shadows: Police

Law-making violence is justified only by victory. And law-preserving violence
cannot determine its own ends. But police are emancipated from both these
constraints. Police are empowered to intervene for "security reasons," where no
clear legal situation exists, where the state can "no longer guarantee through
the legal system the empirical ends that it desires at any price to attain." 

The anxiety of the incompleteness of Law for accounting for daily life
introduces a new "security" concern. The "security" of a community has always
been a concern for societies and kinship groups, but it may be dealt with at a
variety of scales and by various embedded means. But the abstraction of the Law
lifts these conflict-resolution and security concerns from more localized
kinship groups to the responsibility of the State, which then requires an
intermediating force to bridge the gap between the vagaries of day-to-day life
and the rigid, expensive abstractions of the Law. 

The police emerge as this
intermediating force, operating in a kind of ethereal world: "Its power is
formless, like its nowhere-tangible, all-pervasive, ghostly presence in the life
of civilized states."

## Liquidity in the Shadows: Dealers

Such a description of power could apply to at least a few other institutions of
society beyond police. One that comes predominantly to mind is the so-called
"shadow banking" system, which is essentially the system of money dealers. I
will argue that dealers are to the Market what police are to the Law. Cops are
dealers and dealers are cops. And I do not just mean this in the sense that
dealers "police" access to the market, though that is suggestive. To see the
analogy, we have to map our critique of violence from the domain of Law to that
of the Market.

If violence confirms and threatens the Law like transactions confirm and
threaten the Market, we should have an analog to law-making and law-preserving
violence in the world of transactions. We could consider directly applying the
terms "market-making" and "market-preserving", but market-making is already a
term in use. So let's call them market-supplying and market-redeeming (maybe
Benjamin would have benefited from law-supplying and law-redeeming). 

A market-supplying tx offers a good to the market ("sells"), as if the market for
that good might not already exist, but should. Once the good is supplied, we
attempt to mythologize and take for granted its continuous availability. And a
market-redeeming transaction purchases a good from the market ("buys"). In doing
so it preserves the utility of the market as a place where needs can be met, or
desires can be redeemed. Market-supplying is justified by production and
market-redeeming by consumption. Just as law-preserving violence both confirms
and threatens the vitality that makes law, market-redeeming transactions confirm
and threaten the vitality that supplies the market.

We can easily see how this distinction between market-supplying and
market-redeeming is dissolved in the character of the dealer, just as law-making
and law-preserving violence dissolve in the character of the police. Dealers
place both buys and sells in the market, without justification via production or
consumption. Dealers are empowered to intervene for "liquidity reasons" (like
the police’s “security reasons”), where no clear economic situation exists. The
anxiety of the incompleteness of the Market in accounting for daily life
introduces this liquidity concern. 

Similar to "security", "liquidity" is something a community could provide for
itself (in the form of clearing), but is structurally prevented from doing so by
the State's institutionalization of Law and Markets. The abstraction of Markets
lifts these payments and liquidity concerns from more localized and embedded
patterns to the responsibility of the State, which then requires an
intermediating force to bridge the gap between the vagaries of day-to-day life
and the rigid, expensive abstractions of the Market. The dealers emerge as this
intermediating force, operating in a kind of ethereal world: "Its power is
formless, like its nowhere-tangible, all-pervasive, ghostly presence in the life
of civilized states."

## Defund the Dealers, Defund the Police

In both the Law and the Market, citizens are offered guarantees which they can
attempt to redeem by engaging with the abstraction, but which they are more
likely to redeem by engaging with their intermediary - the police or the
dealers. Both institutions of the police and the dealers result in a lot of
anxiety about the preservation of order. Both carry a kind of risk of dealing
with crisis and a constrained capacity, but also significant power. 

Law-making and law-preserving need to be in balance with one another, too much of one
without the other leads to crises. The same is said of market-supplying and
market-redeeming. In law, individuals are not trusted to make and preserve in a
balanced way on their own - that responsibility is entrusted to the police.
Similarly in markets, individuals are not trusted to supply and redeem in a
balanced way - that responsibility is entrusted to the dealers. In both cases,
we could imagine "defunding" the intermediary by promoting more localized and
embedded forms of resolution - in law, for resolving disputes, in markets, for
clearing payments. Defund the Dealers and Defund the Police.

In law, the state of exception is reflected in the anxiety over Law's
incompleteness. It plays out day-to-day in the violence perpetrated by the
institution of the police, but retains a formal though almost irrelevant final
authority in the form of the Supreme Court. The same structure exists in the
Market. The state of exception is reflected in the anxiety over the Market's
incompleteness. It plays out day-to-day in the violence perpetrated by the
institution of the dealers, and retains a formal though almost irrelevant final
authority in the form of the Central Bank. The Supreme Court supplies the base
laws to be intermediated by the police in a similar manner to the Central Banks
provision of base money to be intermediated by the dealers. And in both cases,
they make manifest the power of the Sovereign.

